.\"	Process this file with groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.TH wipefreespace 1 Linux "User's Manual"

.SH NAME
WipeFreeSpace \- Secure cleaning of free space on filesystems.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wipefreespace [options]
.I /dev/XY
.B ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
The WipeFreeSpace program securely cleans the free space and undelete data
on the given ext2/3/4, NTFS, XFS, ReiserFSv3/4, FAT12/16/32, MinixFSv1/2, JFS, HFS+ and OCFS file systems.
Write permissions are required for the devices
(or regular files containing the file system), but the program
.B MUST NOT
be setuid(root).

Each given filesystem is wiped ONLY ONCE, no matter how many times it appears on the command line.
WipeFreeSpace also works for file systems created inside regular files on any host file system.

WipeFreeSpace wipes the following things (when supported by the backing library):
.IP - 2
free space (space in unused blocks/clusters)
.IP - 2
free space in partially used blocks (also called the "slack space")
.IP - 2
deleted files' names and other data that can be used to undelete a file (like the journal)

.LP
WipeFreeSpace does NOT decrease the amount of available free space when working.

To perform a command after wiping (like sending e-mail), simply run a
program after WipeFreeSpace is finished, for example:

	wipefreespace [options] /dev/XY; mail [options]

or in a script:

	#!/bin/bash

	wipefreespace [options] /dev/XY

	mail [options]

To run WipeFreeSpace with a higher or lower priority, simply use the "renice" utility, for example:

	renice +1 $(pidof wipefreespace)


.SH OPTIONS
Any option affects all filesystems given on the command line, not just the ones following it.

.IP "--all-zeros"
Use only zeros for wiping.
.IP "--background"
Continue work in the background, if possible. This disables verose mode.
.IP "-b|--superblock OFFSET"
Superblock offset on the given filesystems
.IP "-B|--blocksize SIZE"
Block size on the given filesystems
.IP -f|--force
Wipe even if the file system has errors
.IP -h|--help
Print help
.IP "--last-zero"
Perform additional wiping with zeros
.IP -l|--license
Print license information
.IP "-n|--iterations NNN"
Number of passes (greater than 0)
.IP "--method NAME"
Use the given method for wiping (read below).
.IP --nopart
Do NOT wipe free space in partially used blocks.
.IP --nounrm
Do NOT wipe undelete information
.IP --nowfs
Do NOT wipe free space on file system
.IP --no-wipe-zero-blocks
Do NOT wipe all-zero blocks on file system (useful for virtual/sparse devices,
where empty areas are read as all-zeros and do not take physical space unless
actually written to).
.IP "--order TYPE"
Use the given order for wiping (read below).
.IP --use-dedicated
Use the program dedicated for the given filesystem type if supported. Fallback to
WipeFreeSpace if unsupported (currently, only 'ntfswipe' is supported)
.IP --use-ioctl
Disable device caching during work (can be DANGEROUS)
.IP -v|--verbose
Verbose output. Use twice for more. This also enables progress bars, but be warned: these may
not always be accurate or increase at a constant rate.
.IP -V|--version
Print version number

.SH "WIPING METHODS"
The following method names (case-insensitive) are available:
.IP Gutmann 10
- method similar to Gutmann's, the default, 36 passes
.IP random 10
- shred-like, 25 passes
.IP schneier 10
- Shneier's method, 7 passes, contains ITSG-06
.IP dod 10
- DoD, 3 passes, contains NAVSO P-5239-26 and German Federal Office for Information Security

.SH "WIPING ORDERS"
WipeFreeSpace supports two wiping orders:
.IP block 10
- wipe block by block with all patterns and flush the overwriting
data to disk after each pattern (so, each block waits to be wiped until the
previous one is done)
.IP pattern 10
- wipe the whole filesystem with each pattern (all blocks with the
first pattern, then all blocks with the second pattern, and so on), and
flushing the overwriting data to disk after each pattern. This is the
default

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The program returns with 0 exit code if everything went fine. If there
were errors, the program exits with non-zero exit code:
.IP 1:
Only version number, help or licence information was requested and printed, no action.
.IP \-1:
Bad/missing command line syntax.
.IP \-2:
Unable to check if the file system is mounted. Cannot continue.
.IP \-3:
The file system was mounted in read-write mode. Cannot continue.
.IP \-4:
Unable to open the file system.
.IP \-5:
Unable to read block bitmap from the file system (thus, unable to determine, which
blocks are unused).
.IP \-6:
Memory allocation failed.
.IP \-7:
The file system contained errors and the option \-\-force was not given.
.IP \-8:
Closing the file system failed.
.IP \-9:
Opening i\-node scan failed. Thus, the program was unable to wipe free space in
partially used blocks.
.IP \-10:
Iterating over blocks failed. Thus, the program was unable to wipe free space in
partially used blocks.
.IP \-11:
I\-node read failed. Some undelete data may not have been removed.
.IP \-12:
Directory iterating failed. Thus, the program was unable to remove some of (maybe all)
undelete data.
.IP \-13:
The program found out that it has the suid permission bit set and the owner
is root. Read the first chapter of the info documentation for an explanation and a solution.
.IP \-14:
Flushing the changes to the filesystem failed.
.IP \-15:
Block writing failed.
.IP \-16:
Failed to open an attribute (mostly on NTFS).
.IP \-17:
Failed runlist on NTFS.
.IP \-18:
Getting name failed.
.IP \-19:
Context error (NTFS).
.IP \-20:
Bad parameter was passed to one of the functions.
.IP \-21:
Pipe error (mostly XFS).
.IP \-22:
Fork error (XFS or ReiserFSv3).
.IP \-23:
Exec error (XFS).
.IP \-24:
Seek error (mostly ReiserFSv4).
.IP \-25:
Block reading failed.
.IP \-26:
I/O control command (ioctl) failed.
.IP \-100:
A signal was caught and the program was forced to exit.

.SH NOTES
Only the last error is returned. If the last file system was wiped successfully,
but the previous weren't, the last error will be returned, but not the previous ones.

It is best to use this program on un-mounted file systems, which makes sure
the journal is committed and there aren't any concurrent modifications.

.SH AUTHOR
Bogdan 'bogdro' Drozdowski,

bogdro (at) users . sourceforge . net

bogdro-soft (at) gmx . com

https://wipefreespace.sourceforge.io

.SH THANKS
Theodore Ts'o, for the great ext2fs library and e2fsprogs.

The linux-ntfs team for their research on NTFS and a great programming library.

Colin Plumb, for the great 'shred' program, parts of which are used here.

Patrick R. McDonald 'marlowe' (www.antagonism.org) - for bug reports, testing and promoting WipeFreeSpace.

Mark Lord (mlord@pobox.com) for the great hdparm utility.

knightray@gmail.com for The Tiny FAT FS library (on LGPL).

Gregory Grosse - for bug reports and testing WipeFreeSpace.

Travis CI (https://www.travis-ci.com/) for providing build environments.

GitHub (https://github.com/) for providing code versioning, security tests, build environments and integration with Travis CI.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR shred (1),
info libsecrm

The 'info' documentation is more descriptive and is the main one. Type

.B 	info wipefreespace

to read it.
